# Reading – [[2025-12-02]]

**16:12:48**
Hypnosis I JOHN: Jump off a cliff? CANDY: He said you might as well go...why wait? (Bain, p. 80)
Jensen specified the date, the place, and the scenario for his subject's death. Candy was to arrive in Nassau, Bahamas, on December 31, 1972. She was to check into the hotel she usually stayed at, the Paradise Beach. Jensen would phone her early in the morning of the next day and cue Arlene to come out and take over. Arlene would then walk the body to an out-of-the-way cliff. It had a fine view of ocean dashing on sharp rocks, far, far below.
When she began the publicity tour for Bain's book about her hypoprogrammed life, Candy told KSAN's interviewer, David McQueen, more about those plans:
“And I was going to take my snorkel, my swimming things, and I would be up on a little promontory where there were pine trees, and put everything down neatly and take off my watch and go in...Arlene Grant was going to dive in...But the person who would have died would have been Candy Jones.” (quoted in Schrag, pp. 443-4)
Candy did not know what was scheduled to happen. Arlene, her unconscious split, knew that the body they shared had only thirty days before the death jump. The existence of Jensen's suicide scenario for Candy did not break through the wall of amnesia which divided her two selves. But something in her did break.
Better Wed Than Dead—Suddenly, like Pavlov's conditioned dogs after the Neva River flood almost drowned them in their basement cages, Candy was breaking Jensenprogramming rules left and right. She broke the isolation rule by contacting her old friend (and longtime admirer), John Nebel.
Unconscious thinking is naturally arranged on a rational foundation of opposites. It is a strange, but true, fact that any chunk of programming in the unconscious—if under unbearable pressure—can escape that pressure by flowing to its opposite in that linkage of opposites. Candy now unconsciously converted Jensen's order to die into its opposite: a compelling and successful bolt to live. She broke Jensen's no love, no marriage rule. She and John had not seen each other for ten years. She was now 47; he was 61. They began to date. They married after a whirlwind, 28-day, romance. Neither she nor John knew her unconscious reason for hurrying.
Both of them knew his reason. John Nebel had terminal cancer.
Candy had first met John when she was 18 and he was 32. He was a photographer on free-lance assignment, photographing her for a Borden ad. He shifted to radio at age 43, hosting WOR's all-night talk show. Over the next eight years, he built his slot into one of the hottest properties in New York radio. When he shifted to WMCA for eight years, and then to WMCA, his loyal listeners followed. He was always in the Nebel-at-Midnight slot, six nights a week, six hours every night. His show was New York's most popular nighttime radio talk show.
Candy had a truth that needed to be discovered. John was a perfect match for that

**16:14:28**
snow was New York's most popular nighttime radio talk show.
Candy had a truth that needed to be discovered. John was a perfect match for that need. Over the past twenty years, he had hosted every imaginable sort of guest on his all-talk show, including numer ous hypnotists. He was famous for his ability to probe the weaknesses of guests. Broadcast schools everywhere played Nebel tapes to teach fledgling interviewers how to get at the truth.
So Candy did not go to the Bahamas to commit suicide. On New Year's Eve, 1972, the exact day she was to have checked in at the Caribbean hotel and begun her suicide sequence, she got married instead. A deeply implanted hypnotic command CAN be resisted, but only by conversion of that neural energy into some other form of expression. It can not be dealt with by a simple denial. Its mental energy, when cued into expression, has to go somewhere. Candy diverted the energy of a suicide scenario into that of a a marriage scenario. Better wed than dead!
At their wedding, the famous bride's long years of CIA-conditioned isolation were obvious. Long John had forty guests. Candy had none, except her mother and the attendant who looked after her. Donald Bain, Nebel's friend and biographer, noticed that, and thought it strange.

**17:48:08**
Jensen's office. He feared that she "would slip into such a deep trance that he would be unable to control her" (Bain, p. 120). He feared Arlene's capacity to publicly embarrass him.
John was either ignorant of, or not a subscriber to, hypnotherapy principles. He could not imagine a positive role for cynical, bitter, uncooperative, independent Arlene in Candy's mind. He never understood that Arlene was the part of Candy strong enough to suffer Jensen's endless horrific abuses, to contain all the forms of pain that he inflicted, and survive it. He never thought of Candy and Arlene as merely separated components of one woman's personality. Candy was John's ideal woman: unfa i l ing ly soft, appreciative, respectful, gentle, sweet, yielding. To him, she was the "real" personality. To his credit, he stayed deeply in love with her through all this. But he never understood that Arlene was genuinely Candy too, a split made from stolen, isolated parts of Candy's own feelings, opinions, and strengths.
John, also, did not like the way that Arlene badmouthed Candy. For Arlene routinely insulted her root self with words such as "dumb," "slow," "stupid." She called Candy a "goody two-shoes" and the "mother of her country" (referring to Candy's tragically abused patriotism). It made John angry when Arlene snickered at the

**18:00:20**
Case History: Candy Jones
Jones in early 1976. (Harper and Row put out Candy Jones' Complete Book of Beauty and Fashion that same year.) Bain's book is not a clinical case study like those of the psychiatrists, Reiter and Mayer. He was only a journalist, trying to report an unfamiliar and difficult topic, but he managed to pass on the basic facts of Candy's history in a readable form.
The Mind Control of Candy Jones holds several unofficial records:
*   The only book-length report of an American victim of unethical hypnosis;
*   The only book-length case report of a hypnoprogrammed person since Reiter's report on Palle;
*   The only book-length study of a hypnoprogramming case that involves narcohypnosis and artificial personality splitting;
*   The only reported case, up to now, in which a hypnoprogramming victim saved herself and managed to get her story told.
Publicity Tour—Candy, via Arlene, had been trying to tell what the CIA, via Dr. Jensen, had done to
Candy—could do to anybody. The final terrifying hurdle of telling was the coming

**18:08:07**
Every eccentric schemer with a harebrained plan for secret operations (from phosphorescent foxes to incendiary bats) would find a sympathetic ear in Donovan's office.” Donovan's comrade and close friend, later U.S. Ambassador to Great Britain, David Bruce, has written about his colleague, “woe to the officer who turned down a project because, on its face, it seemed ridiculous, or at least unusual.” (Scheflin and Opton, The Mind Manipulators)
Donovan hired a crew of talented and daring young men, many of whom completed their careers with the CIA: Stanley Lovell, George White, Richard Helms, Frank Wisner, and Dr. Sidney Gottlieb. Donovan also recruited the nation's best scientific researchers—anybody who had talent and an idea—to work for him, without leaving their particular institutions. And he rallied prominent industrialists, a Who's Who of the nation.1
They fought in the trenches of concealment and deception, across the lines of falsehood and betrayal....It is the same in any war. What is heroic in combat is criminal in peace. Just as combat sanctions physical violence, so espionage grants license to moral violence....It is trite but true to say that they did what they did for the good of their country. Unfortunately, it is also true that it frequently didn't work out that way.

**18:10:26**
done, an American will vicariously glory in it...”
I pondered, then replied: “What I have to do is to stimulate the ‘Peck’s Bad Boy’ beneath the surface of every American scientist and to say to him, ‘Throw all your normal law-abiding concepts out the window. Here’s a chance to raise merry hell. Come, help me raise it.’”
“Stanley,” he responded, using my first name as a sort of password, I felt, to his inner circle, “go to it.”
...with hardly an exception, they [U.S. scientists working on these programs] did outstanding service to their country...every one risked his future status...in identifying himself with illegality and unorthodoxy. (Lovell, pp. 21-22)
In his book, Lovell briefly, but scathingly, denied any OSS use of hypnosis. He said that hypnosis was not real, and was simply tawdry play acting on the part of operator and subject. But British Intelligence used hypnoprogrammed agents almost from the war’s beginning.1 And Dr. George Estabrooks divulged in 1971, in a magazine interview, that he personally had hypnoprogrammed numerous U.S. agents and couriers for the U.S. government during World War II. (“Hypnosis Comes of Age,” Science Digest, April, 1971).
So Lovell was just following Company policy

**19:06:47**
U.S. Research on Hypnosis and Mind Control Begins: 115
1. Now, almost two generations later, it is apparent that Estabrooks, master of hypnosis, had grossly underestimated the power of a related psychological technology—propaganda. Propaganda turned upside-down that which he saw as obvious truth; it established myth as seeming fact. It was the Big Lie technique that did it, the lie endlessly repeated with seeming absolute confidence by everybody who is anybody in hypnosis, psychology, and psychiatry (most of them sincerely believing the words they parroted even though they were not true). these...merely involve details of technique. The theoretical and factual basis of that technique no competent psychologist would question. (Hypnotism, p. 193)1
How to Program an Unknowing Hypnotic Subject Estabrooks estimated that ten hours of hypnosis would be enough to accomplish his basic intention. However, he recommended a ten-month regimen for candidates who were to be both personality split and highly trained. What he called “candidates” were not volunteers. His basic procedure (given in Hypnotism, p. 195) for creating the unknowing hypnoprogrammed subject began with a disguised induction. It then proceeded to suggested amnesia, sealing against

